---
layout: default
title: Introduction to Roy Kiyooka Classroom Visit at the University of Alberta, 1977 (SW153a-b)
permalink: introduction-to-roy-kiyooka-classroom-visit-at-the-university-of-alberta-1977-sw153a-b-
---
<!-- Add an essay or interpretive material below this line,
using HTML or markdown.  Do not modify this file above this line -->
<h1><center>Why are we so paranoid?</center></h1>

<p>In “Roy Kiyooka Classroom Visit at the University of Alberta, 1977,” a fully digitized recording of a classroom dialogue from the SpokenWeb Alberta collection, one particularly frustrated student asks Kiyooka, who has just performed his experimental travelogue <em>Transcanada Letters</em> (1975), “Could you tell me some kind of approach, new and different approach, I could take to writing like yours . . . that might help me with it? Because I am certainly willing to learn what you want to say, but it's just not happening.” This question registers, at once, the student’s desire to fathom the import of the speech of the author/Autre, and is thus a demand for knowledge and a variation of the question ‘what do you mean?’ or ‘what is the significance of your speech?,’ and the “aggressivity” that is, according to French psychoanalyst Jaques Lacan, implicit in every dyadic exchange (“Aggressiveness” 21), for his preceding comment, “I found your diaries terribly uninteresting,” imputes to the question a sense of hostility, configuring it not merely as a cry for help (‘help me to understand, I’m begging you!’), but also, as a challenge to a rival, a provocation (‘you are bluffing,’ ‘your speech has no special significance,’ ‘you are not the subject of knowledge, but, <em>exactly like myself</em>, a loathsome creature vying for mastery’). The student’s speech positions the author/Autre as both, to borrow Lacan’s terminology, “the subject supposed to know,” that is, the subject who knows the ‘true’ meaning of his discourse (<em>The Four Fundamental Concepts</em> 253), and as his ‘alter-ego,’ a little other or autre, an adversarial specular image whose apparent unity is experienced as profoundly threatening.</p> 

<p>The student’s manifest aggression can be viewed as an effect of what Lacan refers to as a “negative transference” in his essay “Aggressiveness and Psychoanalysis” (1948). His concept of the negative transference is greatly indebted to Sigmund Freud’s classical description of the phenomenon in “On the Dynamics of Transference” (1912). In this short paper, psychoanalysis’ founder defines transference as the reactualization of an anachronistic, infantile “imago” hic et nunc (99-100). In accordance with this definition, Lacan argues that negative transference is a strictly imaginary phenomenon, which is to say, that it makes use of semblances and facades (“Aggressiveness” 16). The Imaginary register is, for him, the domain of deceptive yet seductive surface appearances. It is, perhaps most importantly, the primary locus of the child during the primordial mirror stage, which begins in the sixth month of life and ends in the eighteenth month of life, and which facilitates the fabrication of both the ideal-ego and ego, respectively. In the mirror stage, the child narcissistically identifies with its own mirror image (Lacan, “Mirror Stage” 4). This primary narcissistic identification is constitutive of an “Ideal-I,” a sort of template of the quintessential ‘self’ that functions as the basis for successive secondary narcissistic identifications with semblables, and thereby conditions the emergence of the child’s ego (Lacan, “The Mirror Stage” 5-6; “Aggressiveness” 20-21). The relations that are forged by these successive identifications are marked by aggressive tension, for inasmuch as the child’s specular counterparts, in their superficial completeness and harmony, anticipate a future state of wholeness and motor coordination, and thus evoke joy and jubilance, they also portend the possibility of its defeat and domination by the (seemingly) superior other, giving rise to feelings of inferiority, jealousy, and hostility (Lacan, Mirror Stage 4, 7; “Aggressiveness” 20-21). Hence Lacan’s aforementioned notion that aggressiveness subtends all dualistic, ego-to-ego relations. Aggressiveness in adulthood, then, can be understood as the effect of a negative transference that reconstitutes a prehistoric rivalry in the present. In this regard, the student’s agitations are, quite literally, little more than the chatter of his fragile ego, and are addressed, not to a radical alterity, an author/<em>Autre</em>, but to a more or less familiar, bygone combatant.</p> 

<p>Although Lacan’s comments on negative transference in “Aggressiveness and Psychoanalysis” indicate that it is produces intense affects and dualistic relations in the Imaginary, he nevertheless states in <em>Book I: Freud’s Papers on Techniques 1953-1954</em> (1988), an English translation of the French transcription of his first seminar, that the “efficacious transference” is, quite simply, “the speech act” (109), and therefore also situates the phenomenon, insofar as it involves and expedites the transmission of signifiers, in the Symbolic. The Symbolic register, which Lacan often refers to as the big Other, is the domain, not of surface appearances, but of language. Because language regulates all forms of social exchange, and is the means by which societies formulate rules, conventions, and interdictions, the Symbolic is equally the domain of the law. The speech act can be understood as an efficacious transference in the sense that it “changes the nature of the two beings present” (Book I 109), to use Lacan's phrase, casting the listener as a representative of the law or particularization of the great Other, and the speaker, as a docile vassal, eagerly awaiting revelation from on high. While the student’s entreaty for significance succinctly exemplifies speech’s capacity to transfigure the listener into an omniscient entity, questions of this type are not the only way to effectuate the efficacious transference. Indeed, insofar as every string of signifiers implies the existence of a listener that understands its meaning or significance, speech <em>in general</em> is an attribution of knowledge, a birthing of the subject supposed to know. Thus, when Lacan, in his eleventh seminar, states that “as soon as the subject who is supposed to know exists somewhere . . . there is a transference” (<em>The Four Fundamental Concepts</em> 232), he is merely recapitulating the equivalence that he established in his first seminar between the efficacious transference and the speech act.</p>  	

<p>The conundrum of the student is that whenever he is not consciously struggling with his foe in the Imaginary, he is instead unconsciously constituting him as an authority figure in the Symbolic. Direct, unmediated dialogue appears to be impossible. Why does he find himself in this double-bind? </p>

<p>According to Lacan, the subject’s confinement within these two registers is a result of castration. Castration, in his writings, does not refer to the removal of a sexual organ, but to the paternal metaphor, which is a structural or logical moment in the constitution of the subject’s desire. Following Alexander Kojéve’s reading of George W. F. Hegel’s master-slave dialectic, Lacan maintains, throughout his oeuvre, that “Man’s desire is the desire of the Other” (The Four Fundamental 235). While this formulation can be understood in multiple different ways, its primary meaning is that the subject’s desire is to be the object of the desire of the Other. The first representative of the Other that is encountered by the child is its mother or primary caregiver. As Stijn Vanheule explains in his comprehensive study of Lacan’s work on psychosis, <em>The Subject of Psychosis: A Lacanian Perspective</em> (2011), prior to the installation of the paternal signifier, “the child has a signifier for maternal desire, yet its signified is unclear . . . What the child knows is that at one moment mother is present and at another moment she is absent, yet the meaning of this alternation is unclear” (59). In an initial attempt to solve the riddle of maternal desire, the child puts forth the postulate, ‘I am the object of my mother’s desire,’ where the ‘I’ designates, not the enunciating subject, but its specular counterpart (Vanheule 59; Lacan, “On a Question” 188). By orienting the child’s desire towards the image in the mirror, the maternal signifier supports the primary narcissism of the mirror stage (Lacan, “The Mirror Stage” 4). The child’s faith in its inaugural postulate wanes, according to Vanheule, as it begins to realize that “it is not alone in the world,” and that there are a bevy of little others who also attract mother’s attention (60). The mother’s wandering gaze orients the child’s desire towards these little others, for it believes that it can ‘be’ the object of the mother’s desire by ‘assuming’ their images, inaugurating the above mentioned succession of secondary narcissistic identifications or “drama of primordial jealousy” (Lacan, “The Mirror Stage” 7; “Aggressiveness” 21). The child is rescued from this drama by the “metaphor of the Name-of-the-Father” (Lacan, “On a Question” 190). This metaphor is a process of substitution in which the paternal signifier, i.e., the  Name-of-the-Father, replaces or ‘names’ the maternal signifier, and, as a result, bequeaths to the child a signified for Mother’s Desire. “By replacing the signifier of maternal desire with the Name-of-the-Father,” explains Vanheule, “maternal desire loses its enigmatic quality. Henceforth it is a signifier that can be interpreted in terms of the communally accepted ways people relate to each other” (60). In other words, the intervention of the paternal signifier reveals to the child that the desire of the Other is socially determined, governed by rules, conventions, and interdictions. It will therefore continue to identify with aspects of its counterparts in order to ‘be’ the object of the Other’s desire, remaining firmly in the Imaginary, but these identifications will, subsequent to castration, be structured by the law.</p>

<p>The central thesis of Lacan’s paper, “On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis” (1959) is that the mainspring of psychosis is the “foreclosure” of the Name-of-the-Father (190-191, 205). Foreclosure occurs when the Name-of-the-Father, the so-called master signifier which, as indicated above, engenders signification, never appears in the subject’s unconscious. He writes,  “I will thus take Verwerfung to be the ‘foreclosure’ of the signifier. At the point at which the Name-of-the-Father is summoned . . . a pure and simple hole may thus answer in the Other; due to the lack of the metaphoric effect, this hole will give rise to a corresponding hole in the place of phallic signification” (“On a Question” 190). “Phallic significations” are the various answers to the question ‘what do you want?’ that are signified to the subject following the advent of the paternal signifier. Thus, a first consequence of foreclosure, notes Vanheule, is that “questions of existence that are posed at the level of the unconscious — ‘Who am I?’ and ‘What do you want from me?’ — cannot be addressed in a conventional manner . . . This implies the desire of the (m)other remains fundamentally enigmatic” (68-69). Because foreclosure renders the Other’s desire forever indecipherable, the subject is unable to construct its identity via recourse to elements from normative or even countercultural discourses and/or signifiers. Thus, “a second consequence of the foreclosed Name-of-the-Father is that the question of personal identity – ‘Who am I?’ – remains unanswered. Foreclosure leaves ‘black holes’ at the level of a person’s identity” (Vanheule 69). While the paternal metaphor maroons the subject in the Symbolic, in doing so, it provides it with a means for developing a personal identity. The subject is in this respect paradoxically unsnarled by its subordination to the great Other, as this subordination is the precondition of its self-realization. </p>

<p>Whereas Lacan argues that paranoia, as a form of psychosis, is caused by the “foreclosure” of the Name-of-the-Father, which permanently forestalls castration and consequently the subject’s incorporation into the Symbolic, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, in <em>Anti-Oedipus</em> (1972), insist that paranoia is the direct consequence of the successful installation of the paternal signifier. They argue that the paternal signifier is not universal, as Lacan’s writings seem to suggest, but the result of a formal operation, “the paralogism of extrapolation” (<em>Anti-Oedipus</em> 110, 205-206). The paralogism of extrapolation detaches one signifier from the signifying chain and elevates it above the rest, placing it in a position of transcendence and reconstituting it as a “despotic signifier” (Deleuze and Guattari, Anti-Oedipus 110). Each signifier in the chain will thereafter derive its meaning or significance from the despotic signifier despite the fact that, prior to its extrapolation, it was merely a signifier among other signifiers, possessing no special status or properties (Deleuze and Guattari, <em>Anti-Oedipus</em> 110, 206). The paternal signifier or Name-of-the-Father is the paradigmatic despotic signifier. Beginning with the signifier of maternal desire, the alternation of the mother’s presence-absence, it assigns meanings to the elements of the chain. There is no reason to suppose, suggest Deleuze and Guattari, that, pre-castration, the infant is obsessed with questions of exegesis. It only becomes obsessed with these questions after it has internalized the law by accepting its castration. It is the castrated subject who, when confronted with the speech of the Other, is overcome with a monstrous paranoia, looks up towards the heavens, and cries out, “The emperor, the god — what did he mean?” (Deleuze and Guattari, Anti-Oedipus 206). The student, who beseeches Kiyooka, as if he were some sort of despot or godlike entity, to reveal the significance of his sacred writ, is, perhaps, not in a double-bind after all. It may well be that all he needs to do to escape the clutches of the Other is rediscover a pre-oedipal mode of listening, one that is not aimed towards the discovery of meaning, towards understanding, but towards something else…</p>

<h2><center>Works Cited</center></h2>

<p>Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. <em>Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia</em>. 1972. Translated by Robert Hurley, Mark Seem and Helen R. Lane, Penguin, 2009.</p>
<p>Freud, Sigmund. “On the Dynamics of Transference (1912).” <em>Standard Edition, Volume XII (1911-1913)</em>, edited by James Strachey et al., Hogarth Press, 1958, pp. 97-108.</p>
<p>Kiyooka, Roy. <em>Transcanada Letters</em>. 1975. Edited by Smaro Kamboureli, NeWest Press, 2005.</p> 
<p>Kojève, Alexandre. <em>Introduction to the Reading of Hegel: Lectures on the Phenomenology of Spirit</em>. Edited by Allan Bloom, translated by James H. Nichols Jr., Cornell University Press, 1980.</p>
<p>Lacan, Jacques. “Aggressiveness and Psychoanalysis.” 1948. <em>Écrits, a selection</em>. 1966. Translated by Bruce Fink, W. W. Norton & Company, 2002, pp. 10-30.</p>
<p>–––. <em>The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis</em>. 1973. Edited by Jacques-Alain Miller, translated by Alan Sheridan, Karnac, 2004.</p>
<p>–––. “The Mirror Stage as Formative of the I Function, as Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience.” 1949. <em>Écrits, a selection</em>. 1966. Translated by Bruce Fink, W. W. Norton & Company, 2002, pp. 10-30.</p>
<p>–––. “On a Question Preliminary to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis.” 1959. <em>Écrits, a selection</em>. 1966. Translated by Bruce Fink, W. W. Norton & Company, 2002, pp. 10-30.</p>
<p>–––. <em>The Seminar of Jacques Lacan: Book 1, Freud’s Papers on Technique, 1953-1954</em>. 1975. Edited by Jacques-Alain Miller, translated by John Forrester, W. W. Norton & Company, 1991.</p>
<p>–––. <em>The Seminar of Jacques Lacan: Book 3, The Psychoses, 1955-56</em>. 1981. Edited by Jacques-Alain Miller, translated by Russell Grigg, W. W. Norton & Company, 1993.</p>
<p>Vanheule, Stijn. <em>The Subject of Psychosis: A Lacanian Perspective</em>. Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.</p> 
